---
categories: [frontend]
tags: [js]
title: "Bootcamp Module 6: Programming Fundamentals"
source: [juno]
---

## Intro to Programming

So far, HTML and CSS only really allow us to add content and style it. If we want to have our computer listen for events, communicate with services, or even modify styles on the fly, we need **programming languages**.

### The programmer's job

The role of a programmer is taking a solution or set of actions that we want to perform and then translating it in a way that a computer understands. We are essentially **translaters**.

Computers need **very detailed instructions** in order to understand what to do. They don't understand context and how to read the implicit intent behind a statement.

### The DOM

The **document object model** is one big JavaScript object that contains all the HTML elements on your page structured as a tree just like HTML itself.

It is generated by the browser?

## Intro to JavaScript

The official name of JavaScript is actually **ECMAScript**, which stands for the European Computer Manufacturers' Association, the maintainers of JavaScript.

### REPL

REPL stands for **read, evaluate, print, loop**. You want a REPL environment because it's a great playground to test JavaScript.

Firefox dev tools has a console, a REPL environment, by default!

### Data types

There are 6 main fundamental data types in JavaScript:

* Number
* String
* Boolean
* Undefined
* Null
* Object
* **Bonus**: Symbol (for library creation)

To check for data types, you can use `typeof [value]`.

**Pro tip**: `null` is a positive statement saying that there is an empty box, and there is nothing in it. In contrast, `undefined` simply says there is an empty box.

### Debugging functions

`prompt()` takes in user input and returns it.

`alert()` shows a popup with the text provided inside.

`confirm()` returns `true` or `false` depending on whether the user pressed OK or Cancel.

`console.log()` prints out the value of what you pass into it. It's great for testing what values are what.

**Pro tip**: Remove all your `console.log()` statements in your production website!

## Variables

Statements give instructions to the computer but don't always return a value. On the other hand, expression always return a value.

### Assignment

```js
let email = "hello@email.com"; // statement

let secondEmail;
secondEmail = "hi@email.com"; // expression
```

**Note**: You can declare a new variable in Firefox console with an expression (with no use of `const` or `let`), but you can't do this in your `.js` files.

### Operators

```js
"2" + 2
// "22"
```

The expression above evaluates to the string `"22"` because of **coercion**, a specific quirk of JavaScript.

```js
"HackerYou" * 6;
"HackerYou" * "Class";
// Both of these expressions return NaN because multiplication only works with numbers
```

The **increment** and **decrement** operators are literally just shorthand for reassignment!

```js
const myNum = 1;
myNum++; // functionally equivalent as myNum = myNum + 1
```

The side effect of this fact means that increment/decrement operators, when used, will change the value of your variable. Whereas `myNum + 1` doesn't because it's an expression, not a statement.

Also, there's a version of the increment/decrement operators with the increment/decrement *before* the variable: `++myNum`. `++myNum` will reassign the variable and *then* evaluate it. `myNum++` will evaluate the variable and *then* reassign it. These are known as **pre-increment/pre-decrement** and **post-increment/post-decrement**.

```js
let myNum = 1;
myNum++; // returns 1
myNum; // returns 2

let myNum = 1;
++myNum; // returns 2
myNum; // returns 2
```

### Template literals

Template literals are just like strings but just make **concatenation** easier.

Syntax:

```js
const myName = "Dan";
const templateLiteral = `Hi ${myName}, I'm a template literal!`;
```

## Working with JavaScript

### Semicolons

Semicolons indicate the end of a distinct instruction. Sometimes, you can get away with adding a semicolon because of ASI, **automatic semicolon insertion**. However, this is not recommended. Add your semicolons!

## Programming Control Flow

Normally, instructions are executed one after another. **Control flow** gives you the power to control the order of what gets executed.

## Functions

This is a function **declaration**. Known as **hoisting**, JavaScript reads and loads these functions before it starts executing any lines of code, so you can do this:

```js
add(1, 2);

function add(a, b) {
    return a + b;
}
```

This is a function **expression**. It only loads when the interpreter reaches the line of code that the function is on:

```js
const add = function(a, b) {
    return a + b;
}

add(1, 2);
```

**Pro tip**: It's a good idea to use function expressions for the very fact that they force you to be organized with your code: functions at the top first.

## Objects

You can iterate through the properties of an object using a `for in` loop.

```js
for (let key in object) {
    console.log(object[key]); // prints every value
}
```

## Arrays and methods

### Arrays

Arrays are basically objects with keys as **indices**. On top of that, items in arrays come in the order that you create them.

```js
const obj = {
    "0": "hi",
    "1": "bye"
}

// is kind of like...

const arr = [
    "hi", // index 0
    "bye" // index 1
]
```

### Methods

Creating a method is structurally similar to function expressions.

```js
const person = {
    name: "Dan",
    fly: function() {
        console.log(`I'm ${person.name}, and I'm flying!`);
    }
}

person.fly();
```

Methods can be broken into 2 categories:
* **Getters**: These methods get information from the object.
* **Setters**: These methods edit or update or add information to the object.

### The this keyword

The `this` keyword, among other things, is a way to reference an object *from inside the object* itself.